Raymond Sidney-Smith  0:00  
Welcome to Productivity Book Group. I'm your host and facilitator Ray Sidney-Smith. Thanks for joining us here for Productivity Book Group group discussion of the book The Seven Habits of Highly Effective People, the 30th anniversary edition by Dr. Stephen R. Covey, with Sean covey doing a new introduction to the 30th anniversary edition. And so, before we get started just a little bit about the author and then about the book as usual, then we'll get into the conversation. So quoting here from partially from Wikipedia, I made some changes here, but for the most part, this is the Wikipedia introduction to Dr. Covey. So Stephen R. Covey was an American educator, author, business leader, the co founder of Franklin Covey, company, and keynote speaker. He's the author of more than a dozen works, his most popular book being the Seven Habits of Highly Effective People. His other books include among First things first, principle centered leadership, the Seven Habits of Highly Effective families. The eighth habit, which is our next book, and the leader in me how schools and parents around the world are inspiring greatness, one child at a time. In 1996, Time Magazine named him one of the 25 most influential Americans. He was a john he was the Jon M. Huntsman, presidential chair and leadership and professor at the Jon M. Huntsman School of Business at Utah State University at the time of his death in April 2012. from complications from a bicycling accident, covey is survived by his wife, nine children and 55 grandchildren at that time, a little bit about the book itself. Again, I'm quoting here from the Amazon description I believe, quote, this beloved classic presents a principle centered approach for solving both personal and professional problems with penetrating insights and practical anecdotes. Stephen R. Covey reveals a step by step pathway for living with fairness, integrity, honesty, and human dignity principles that give us the security to adapt to change, and the wisdom and power to take advantage of the opportunities that change creates. And quote. And so with that, let's get into the conversation of the Seven Habits of Highly Effective People. 13th anniversary edition. What did you think? What were your immediate thoughts from having read this new edition of the book? And maybe some of you have read maybe an older edition of the book so maybe you have some compare and contrast? What are your thoughts with related relating to that? Dr. Buck you want to get us started? Well, first of all, gosh, has it really been that long? 2012 since we lost Dr. Cathy de Yeah, it doesn't seem like it. But yeah, his influence Wow, has it ever lasted and if anything, has grown and speaks more to our world as we know it now and then the need for it, then than it ever has? And then about this when I really enjoyed the things that Sean covey had to say. I think each chapter a set we just added that new perspective and that insight into what was life like in the covey household? What was it like to live with Dr. Stephen Covey?

Raymond Sidney-Smith  3:15  
Well, you know, the thing that I enjoyed most about Sean's perspective and to some great extent in the in, in the afterword, where he kind of talks about the fact that, you know, Dr. Covey was himself on the stage, the same person, you know, off the stage. And he, he makes a point, that is Dr. Covey makes the point. And then Shawn reinforces it afterward in that afterward, that, you know, like, we all try to aspire to the principles of the seven habits and fail. And that it's really the, the pursuit of it, that is the goal. And it's kind of like habits, right? It's not about developing the habit, it's about the journey toward developing the habit, that is really the goal. And when you do that, then you actually achieve the creation of, of better habits, and better routines. And I tweeted this out, I don't know, earlier this week, or last week about how this reading through has been the most, you know, insightful reading of the book. And, you know, it's 30 years, you know, I've read it many, many times over and this time was actually quite heartfelt for me, I felt, you know, really inspired by a lot of the pieces. I also note that, you know, it came out in 2020. And in amongst all of the various changes in society, the principles stood up, notwithstanding the fact that there are a couple of you know, this is a you know, straight white male, writing a book 30 years ago, and there are some stories that don't quite, you know, fit into the narrative of of the 2020s. But, you know, it wasn't a bad thing. I just felt like It was it was certainly interesting to see that contrast. But I still felt like the principles. And that whole concept of principle centeredness really still resonated with me and really deep ways that I thought anyone else, what were your reactions to the book?

Unknown Speaker  5:16  
This was this is Linda, this was my second read. And I think for me, sometimes you'll read a book and it's not the right time. And I felt like this was the right time for me. Like, it totally resonated differently. This time. I loved Sean's additions. In fact, I have my whole household reading the book right now. So I was like, I'm, I'm reading this edition. And my sister's reading the, the old edition and I said, Oh, no, you've got to come and read John's edition, because they're really insightful and helpful. But I really, it struck me this time, my first initial, after finishing was a we're going to just talk about this for an hour. Because there's a lot to this book,

Raymond Sidney-Smith  6:03  
there is quite a lot to the book so so we won't be able to cover all of it. But we will try to do as much as we can in the time that we have. And so first I wanted to kind of hop into kind of just a quick review of the seven habits and then and then we can we can talk about the book from the beginning but I'll start off with you know, for those of you who are unaware of the seven habits, they are habit one be proactive habit to begin with the end in mind. Habit three, put First things first, habit four, think Win Win, habit five, seek first to understand then to be understood, habit six synergize. And then habit seven, sharpen the saw. And so just I want to keep reinforcing the habits so that we can talk about them throughout the conversation. But just to kind of get started. Dr. Covey talks about this concept of the personality ethic and the character ethic and in his research, realizing that the character ethic was what he wanted to really push forward in terms of these axiomatic you know, habits that he's he's talking about here. What did you think about the difference between personality and character ethic, and why there was this perspective for Dr. Covey to want to push the character ethic narrative as being useful, I'm going to read some of the comments because some folks are on mute and are unable to, to, to speak. So I'm going to just note here, Matthew noted, this is a transformational book, the greatest influence on his life has been on communication with others, and he believes he's become a better listener, ironically enough, he says I am having an easier time conveying how I feel, especially without having to filter through things, future things through the ego and, and so Matthew noted cults of personality or dominant narrative of success in the 21st century. And then of course, authentic connection and true wish to empathize is in part of totally understandable. They're the wary Go for it.

Unknown Speaker  8:12  
Yeah, hi, everybody. Hey, see, when I was reading the book, habit complete is my rephrase. But I found a new, a new sense of enjoyment reading it, probably because I'm not grouping it with a certain self help. Emphasis, which I did, probably when I read it 20 something years ago. In terms of character and personality, I think it really matters the point he's making, because fundamentally, there is a long history of character effort to developing one's own character. But allowing a personality to grow within that, I think was very inspirational and something that we need to come to terms with, in order to develop the best habits, especially as an individual contributor, thank you.

Raymond Sidney-Smith  9:06  
Of course, thanks so much, Linda.

Unknown Speaker  9:09  
I, what I got was that it's more the emphasis is because the personality is something that we're either born with, or is developed in that we're stuck with. And that's just the way we are and character is something you grow and develop and is more conscious, and you can choose to be a certain type of person as opposed to this is just how I am and everyone just has to kind of deal with me. So that was what I got from the difference between that character and personality was that that's the crux is like you need to take responsibility and make choices for yourself as opposed to just being who ever you just happen to be.

Raymond Sidney-Smith  9:48  
Right. I was thinking about how the dialogue talks about private victory and then public victory and that Dr. Covey talks about The fact that most of the time, it is the public problem, right? The the problems that you that are surface that ultimately lead to you then recognizing that you need to go back to the private victory work in order to be able to fix in order for those public problems to go away, which is why he actually usually teaches the public victory first, then circles back to private, because most people aren't are unaware of the problem being associated with a private issue, right, which is that, you know, being proactive is going to solve potentially the problems have public problems, right. And so if people can't depend upon you, for x and y, these these private issues are really the things that are that are surfacing. And you don't know it, right? You just, you're just unaware. And it's like putting First things first, you know, habit three, you're not capable of doing that sense of prioritization. Because you, you see external problems, right, you know, you're thinking, Oh, well, this person wants things from me, and you're having a very win, lose or lose win, experience that win lose or lose win experiences happening because you're not properly prioritizing things. And so it's like, Oh, right. Now, if we deal with this personal problem, this problem that's on the inside my problem, then I'm gonna solve the problem on the outside. And that's a counterintuitive perspective, but we just have to kind of understand those pieces. And I appreciated that the most in terms of understanding that this this character ethic piece, which is developing our ourselves on the inside, you know, there's not any level of surface stuff that's going to fix the the true problems that we have with the world around us those, I really do appreciate that concept. Any other thoughts there related to character and personality ethic? And questions? Maybe that you have about it? Okay, so moving on. Let's, let's talk a little bit about the idea of the inside out approach kind of hinted to it to some extent just now. But what is this whole idea or notion of inside out? What do you feel like, is the thing here? And so who should as also noting that she agrees character Trumps all in her perspective and as good foundation to build on? Yeah, so couldn't agree more with that. But what's the inside out approach? Dr. Buck? What did you hear when, when you when you heard the inside out of protocol? Well,

Unknown Speaker  12:23  
I think it all goes back to, you know, just really handling yourself realizing the that you are in command of the choices that you make, that there are certain things that you can influence there certain things that you don't have any influence over, and you're concentrating your efforts on those things that you can control.

Raymond Sidney-Smith  12:48  
Yeah, I always, I always think of it as like, personal responsibility. And the my favorite, not my favorite book, but one of my favorite books of the early 90s was the What was the name of the book, it was called. I will come back to me later now. Now I can't I can't.

Unknown Speaker  13:07  
I'm okay. You're okay. No, no, not that one. Yeah, no,

Raymond Sidney-Smith  13:11  
it's not something for me. It was, oh, it doesn't matter. Either way, you know, is this whole idea of about personal responsibility. And the, it was john G. Miller was the author. And it'll come back to me as soon as we stop the book club discussion. But anyway, the whole idea of personal responsibility, which is that internally, I'm in that I'm in, I'm the one in control, not just from the perspective of the the circumstance, but that my experience is what dictates my reality. And so my perception of experience more, so to save to that. So if I, if I perceive a situation, well, or poorly, that's my reality. And by virtue of thinking from that perspective, that's an internal world, right? And so if someone has a rich internal world, then it really doesn't matter what their external world is, is in that sense, right? Because you can, you can externalize what's on the inside. And I feel like that's really where the inside out approach comes. For me. It's like all of that development, all of that work really starts with you. And so if you feel like a relationship is, is challenged or strained, it's really not the, you know, it's not the relationship it's not the other person that really does begin with you changing your paradigm with regard to how you're relating with that individual and as soon as you do that, then everything kind of changes around. And so yeah, so Matthew's noting the the key talks about a concentration camp because it comes from Dr. Viktor Frankl and his experience in the Nazi concentration camps there and the fact that you know, he realized this, this space between stimulus and responses as Dr. Covey is famous for saying of Frankel's work and you know, the space between stimulus And responses control. And you know, the more you distance those things, stimulus and response, the greater amount of control that's, this is always something that has stuck with me, you know, over the past 30 years, it has stuck with me, which is really phenomenal. We're in

Unknown Speaker  15:17  
terms of you, yes, I think you can send comes from Victor Frankel's work, but I think, maybe a little bit older than that, um, what an individual having the ability to take ownership of what they value, or what inspires them, or brings them joy, really powerful thing. And I think, in reading it the second time through now, covey conveys that expertly, the idea of what you value rather than a goal per se, can actually bring you a lot more joy in what we pursue. So if I want to create better habits, namely how I value it, what I value and what time I want to invest my energy into, can actually make it a lot easier to achieve the goals I want to rather than just doing it based on the outside of what society says I should value or what to say. He says I should do. I think that's a major part of developing that. Interior authenticity.

Raymond Sidney-Smith  16:22  
Absolutely. And just to clarify, so the book is the question behind the question by john G. Miller to Google that to make sure I got it, but it's a it's a such a quick read, but it's a it's an for me an important book in my own development in terms of just understanding personal responsibility. And so yeah, question behind the question or QB Q. And yeah, so, so, on the heels of that, there is a whole set of principles that Dr. Covey presents in succession in leading up to the seven habits, one of those being interdependence, the difference between dependence and independence or the the natural kind of progression from dependence say as a child, you depend upon your parents in order to survive, then we go on to this desire for independence, that is to be separate and apart from the world to interdependence and understanding that everything in life is interdependent. And that when we try to decouple ourselves through extremes whether that be independence complete independence meaning becoming a hermit, you know or extremes on the other side of becoming completely dependent upon others, we are going to be in misalignment lack integrity in life in general. It's only through interdependence and understanding that we are dependent upon each other to make kind of everything in our lives work well that we ultimately thrive. What are your thoughts there in terms of that principle of interdependence? Do you feel that in your life do you not feel it in your life? Do you feel like it made sense to you did you grok it this time around? Where are you in the on the topic vendor interdependence?

Unknown Speaker  18:06  
Yeah, I mean it it's absolutely true. You know, the old No, man is an island sort of thing. You know, I think any of us that have had a pretty good deal of success in any part of our lives, you can look at other people as playing into that Yeah, we didn't do it by ourselves that it was people cooperating with each other and everybody carrying their their fair share of the load.

Raymond Sidney-Smith  18:36  
Yeah, I always joke that like even if you feel like you are completely independent, you know, like you lived off the grid You know, you're you're doing whatever you still have gravity of Thank you. You know, there there are there are forces you know, natural forces that you have to be you know, dependent upon for your survival. And so, you know, if you don't have gravity, you're gonna die really quick, you know, humans are humans are fickle creatures in that sense. So, you know, we do have a lot to, to consider when it comes to interdependence, and that when we are truly interdependent, were not depending upon people more or less for things, and that creates a sense of equilibrium. And I always try to think about that equilibrium in life is like, what am I giving in? Not necessarily monetary ways, but what am I giving in all of those other soft ways that produces value in people's lives? Ken? I

Unknown Speaker  19:32  
think that this notion of interdependence is something that's really an idea for our time. The balance of independence and interdependence, has been playing out in the media, in people's thoughts during this period of time going back the last year and a half or two that I call the pandemonium and where many people have Have overstressed the notion of independence within the context of community and under stress under emphasized the notion of interdependence. And that this balance is something that's underlying a significant amount of consternation and conflict in our communities today. And I wish that more people were able to understand Covey's approach, and that there was a more generalized understanding of the importance, significance and imperative of our interdependence. It it came to the fore early on in the pandemic, pandemic, when people began to identify who was unnecessary participants, who were the people who are critical to our communities continuing to operate. And that that that surprised people about our interdependence. But it, it didn't quite stick in the way covey would hope. And it doesn't quite stick in the way I would hope. And maybe with Sean's new version, getting a new read in the community, we can move in that direction.

Raymond Sidney-Smith  21:16  
Yeah, I really do wish that the Seven Habits were something that was more universally part of the, the, you know, education, you know, in, in, you know, wobbly, really, I mean, it's not a, you know, just like a pandemic, it's not localized to any country we need, we need everybody to understand these principles. And there are good principles that we can all you know, understand. Linda, did you have something that you wanted to say? Okay, okay. I just wanted to make sure. So, yes, absolutely seven habits in all schools, Matthew. So with that being said, there is then he talks about the parable of the golden goose. And this P P, P, PC production versus production capacity concept, did that relate to you and the concepts of efficiency versus effectiveness? I know that's something that I always think about what is which is like, what is true effectiveness? Right, which is basically balancing production and production capability. And what what did that kind of summon for you in terms of thought, did you have any Did you have anything that came to the fore in terms of that whole p pc? balance? comm? Yes, no, maybe? So I'll note that for me, I definitely got some some thumbs up. Yes. So I know, for me, I definitely felt like the, the concept resonated with me. And so just In short, you know, the golden goose is that the goose obviously needs to be cared for. If you kill the goose, then he can no longer lay the golden eggs. And so you have to actually take care of the means of production, as well as, you know, the, the concept of the production itself. So you know, production capability, the golden goose itself, versus the eggs need to be decoupled. And in terms of your thought process for how to maintain those things, it's, it's very appropriate considering many people talk today about taking care of yourself, you know, how taking care of yourself or self cares, as many people call it is so important to the ultimate, you know, productivity that you can have. And so I apologize, I muted someone. So if you want to talk, by all means, unmute yourself by just hearing a little bit of background noise. So, um, so with that, let's go ahead and go for it.

Unknown Speaker  23:29  
Well, I was just gonna say, when you hear production, production capability, you think production, right. But to me, it's like, relationships and that kind of, I mean, it's not it's a universal concept. It's not just about like a business thing or something like that, or manufacturing, it's, it's literally, if you want to have a relationship, you have to have the, you have to take care of the capacity for the relationship, as well as the actual relationship. So that balance, I think, is there for, if that makes sense.

Raymond Sidney-Smith  23:58  
Yeah, yeah, that's kind of like he talks later in the book about the emotional bank account and how we can put deposits into emotional bank account but we can also are overdraw on that bank account as well right, you know, there is the the holding container of a value, right and, and he also talks about values versus principles there. But the idea here is that we can we can have containers of value, right, which is the goose itself. And then we can have the the the thing that is the value, which is the which is which are the golden eggs. And and we can we can deplete one of those things, and produce more of it. But we can't deplete the other of those things, which is the container of the value or the production of that value. And so we have to be mindful of those those kind of a paradigm, the object of those two items in our minds. So let's get into the habits then. Right? So we have the seven habits, and we start with being proactive and so in essence What does it mean to be proactive? What what are the what are the components of proactive? And how do they relate to your kind of interpretation of that prank, we'll do

Unknown Speaker  25:12  
that you're the one who's doing the planning, you have a vision for how you want your life to work, that you see your, your role in how you can make a difference, and that the things you're doing on a given day are, instead of reacting to what comes towards you, you know, instead of being the, you know, the cashier at the store, who's going next night and just handling whatever comes your way that you're more or less getting that to shippi Oh, and I think back to my days as a middle school assistant principal, you know, that is a job that could be all day, every day, you're waiting for the next discipline problem to show up at your office. Or it can be a job where you're trying to figure out what is it that we can do to prevent these problems? How can we supervise better? How can we arrange things and traffic flow with the halls and this sort of thing that will prevent problems, rather than dealing with the problems as a result, and one of them takes more thought, but sure saves a whole lot? Well, I

Unknown Speaker  26:24  
mean, this might speak to where I'm at, personally, but I feel like if you, if you said, like, you know, with GTD, it's always like, oh, if you just want to do one thing, you know, pick this thing, or, if you're gonna pick one habit, to me, this is the habit, like if people were just proactive, the whole world would be a completely different place, right? If we all and basically, to me, it's like taking your power, saying, Okay, I have a choice, I'm going to make decisions in my life, I'm not going to just react to what happens to me, I'm going to take the initiative and make choices. And this was huge for me personally, reading this, again, because I tend to be a reactive person, or have tended, I'm gonna say I have tended to be a reactive person in the past, like last week, but now it's like, you know, really seeing that, like, you talked about the space between the stimulus and the response as control, you know, really taking control of your own destiny and making decisions for yourself as opposed to just reacting to our environment. I mean, I look at what's happening globally, right now. It's like, if, if, if we were proactive about what's happening to us now, as a civilization, things would be so different, right now. It's just reactivity. It's like, oh, let's do this, because this happened to us, you know. So I just think this is the this is the big one. To me. Yeah, the rest are really is all important. But this one is like, the crux, and I think that's why it's first, because if you don't get this, it's gonna be hard to do the rest.

Unknown Speaker  27:55  
I think Matthew mentioned in the comments about the circle of concern. And that was the other thing in this chapter. For me, the idea of the circle of concern, the circle of influence, I'm concerned about a whole bunch of things, you know, how the coach is doing his job, how the President is doing his job, the price of eggs in China, all of those things concern me, but what are the things I can actually do something about al and he talks in the book about how the more time you spend within that circle of influence, the things you can actually do something about, the larger that circle becomes, and the more time that you're spending on the outer circle, the circle of concern, all the things that I don't like the way those things are in somebody out to do something and you bang your fist? Well, the smaller the inner circle, that circle of influence becomes, is kind of like the the, the old man that you see sitting at that table over Jack's hamburgers or whatever eaten breakfast, talking about, oh, how that coach is so dumb, and he should have called this play and he should do this and the president of a bla bla bla bla bla, and nobody cares what they think except them sitting around that table.

Unknown Speaker  29:18  
Think to you, I think if in, the more you understand your circle of influence, the less reactive you become, because then you know what you can act upon on Sunday. Yeah, I felt like I had that this morning. It was like something was bothering me. And I was like, well, I could take this action. And that would stop this thing from happening. As opposed to reacting with agitation or irritation. I could just take this action that will eliminate that bothersome thing, because I could see the difference between my circle of concern or my circle of concerns I wanted to stop but my circle of influence is well I could do something to change it. It won't stop the thing from happening, but it'll be away from me. Yeah. So it's, I think it's it really is really important to underline That concept that you brought up, was it, Matthew?

Unknown Speaker  30:03  
Thanks. Yeah, I saw that Matthew puts up to me in the comments. Yeah. And you all those days, when I feel like I really am operating in that circle of, of influence, if I truly am putting shoulder to the wheel, I'm so busy with those kinds of things, I don't have time to worry about all those things out there that I can't influence

Raymond Sidney-Smith  30:27  
that kind of binds together all of those concepts of, of Inside Out of personal responsibility, and about the fact that reactivity is really a, I don't know, it's a generator of worry and concern and all of the negative outputs. Barry Schwartz, I believe it was who wrote, I apologize, I keep having to meet someone. But the the Barry Schwartz wrote that book about good stress, bad stress, or, you know, I think that was the name of the book. And in that he talks about the fact that good stress are the things that open doors and, and open dialogue and productive conversation and those kinds of things. And bad stress are the things that closed doors and opportunities and those kinds of things, and make you feel smaller, and so on and so forth. And I think about that, each time, I think about circle of influence and circle of concern, in that, the more you increase that circle of influence, by by having a proactive focus, you're really gaining greater interdependence, you're, you're less victim thinking, you know, all of those things kind of like, like fall away in terms of the negative stuff and the positive stuff starts to happen. And, you know, again, going back to question behind the question, like that's a kind of a, a, a very insightful, small dialogue on the whole concept of just being proactive. And I appreciate that. And your

Unknown Speaker  31:49  
and your circle of if you're, the more reactive you are, the more your circle of concern increases, because you're like a ping pong ball bouncing against everything else. And those things matter. You can't control them, but they matter because you're constantly reacting to all of those things. So they grow and your circle of influence shrinks. But the less reactive you are, the more you can grow that circle of influence, because you're focusing on what you can control.

Raymond Sidney-Smith  32:12  
And this is, and this is conjecture, but I have a tendency to believe that you then tend to think of those things that you're becoming more aware of as being more negative, even though they may not be right, you may take them the wrong way, because the increased stimuli become more aggravating to you. Right? And I know that I've experienced that in my own world, oh, reactivity makes

Unknown Speaker  32:35  
you more negative it makes makes you see things more negatively, right? Because you're, you're concerned about it, you're worried about, like, what is this person going to think are all those things that you do when you're reactive? Because if you're reacting negatively, you are probably producing negative. Right? So it's not it's not you're not delusional, you probably are feeling negative about you, because you're being negatively reactive.

Raymond Sidney-Smith  32:59  
Yeah, yeah, absolutely. And so moving right along, we could continue to talk about all of these things. So by all means, but moving right along to the second habit, habit number two, beginning with the end in mind, we have all probably heard some version of this in our worlds, which helps to resonate the importance of habit to Was there anything new in thinking through the end in mind concept in this particular read, and other thoughts there. And I'll note for myself, this was a refresher. So I felt as though in the past I we had a pretty good concept of planning and preparing for an outcome. And in the last year and a half to two years, it's just been a little bit different. And now all of a sudden, I'm, I'm remembering those muscles of like, Oh, yeah, that's right. Like, why am I not thinking about the outcomes I want, they may be different at the end, but they'll be better for me having thought them through. And I felt like there was like a living in the moment. I don't know kind of ethos that I was I was experiencing. And I've now taken myself out of that and said, Okay, let me just step away from all of this. And what does the end project look like for these things, which means I'm also going to have to get rid of some of my darlings, right? I'm going to kill some of my darlings, I'm just going to have to shut down some projects in order to really focus on making these things happen in light of the other stressors in my life right now. And, you know, it's been, as I said, At the start of our conversation, it's why this particular read through has been much more you know, kind of impacting on me is because I have felt that sense that Oh yeah, this has been this period of time where so much has been happening in so many different areas of my life. mostly good not withstanding, you know, global pandemic and all. And I needed to step back and actually do some forward thinking forward planning and looking at what the end would look like so that I can start saying okay, If I do all of that, retrospective planning, that backwards planning, then some of these things just can't be here. And they're getting in the way of that future outcome. Even if it doesn't look exactly the same at the end, it will be, it will be a better product at the end, if I actually get rid of these obstacles that are in the way of that, I think a big

Unknown Speaker  35:19  
chunk of this does this habit is the mission statement. And for me, wasn't new information. But I received it in a different way. And I was able to write a mission statement that was unlike any that I've ever seen before, like, Okay, I'm just gonna write what I think. And it was completely different, it was kind of nice and freeing to be able to, to do that with this. But I think that's, I think without a mission, it's really hard to write goals, it's really hard to plan ahead, because if you don't have a direction to go in, even if that direction is even if you're Leonardo da Vinci and your direction is to basically do everything, you know, then that's a direction, right. But if you don't have a direct, if you don't have a mission statement, it's really tough to, to do all that planning.

Raymond Sidney-Smith  36:07  
And so moving right along to habit number three, which is the one that we probably all know most in our our study of personal productivity literature, is, of course, putting First things first, and this is all about prioritizing. And again, to me, this still harkens and feels like the interconnectedness of all of these various habits. But this is a distinct skill set, which is being able to focus on something and no, that's the right focus for right now. Right. It's like, Why this? Why now? And the ability to answer both of those questions, and be both motivated and committed to that end? Was there anything that you thought of when you're reading this component, and then we're probably going to after this, this is the private victories part of the book, we'll probably just open up the dialogue to any of the other thoughts you had there. But I'll note, Matthews, note here, he said, it looks like there is a much better way to organize that the weekly planning rather than the daily response to urgency kind of dealing with the latest and loudest, as David Allen would say, in the important and urgent kind of quadrant there. It's all about aligning your long term goals habit to with the current moment, and then OSHA is asking, how do you handle pushback from others, when they see you doing this? And I'm not sure what this means. But OSHA?

Unknown Speaker  37:36  
Let me clarify that very quickly. Yeah, go for it. Yeah. Yeah. So I've been particularly focused on putting First things first, many times, like in sports, and others, particularly in the family have accused me of, you know, doing something that's important to you, or, you know, whatever, that's your priority, or whatever, and you're getting it done, but how about the rest of us, you know, kind of, it's like, not putting what may be important to somebody else, even though at the end of the day in my book, this is still the first priority, all things being considered,

Raymond Sidney-Smith  38:11  
right. So I think this is a little bit more of the think, win win and synergy and synergizing I think both of those habits need to be attended to not think of them as habits as more skills, but like, those are two skills that need to be worked on here when it comes to it. Because in reality, if if they are thinking that First things first are different than what you believe they are, then you're in a lose, win or lose lose situation. And of course, you know, win lose or lose when Dr. Covey says is a lose lose proposition. Right? So you're ultimately feeling this distress from the fact that there's a misalignment? And so where can you actually synergize And the idea here is that if you can, it's not it's not just about convincing people right, because persuasion is a is a is a faculty independent of that, and you can almost consider that a personality ethic kind of situation. But in reality, if you can make something better by virtue of the people coming together, and involving themselves in you know, whether that be buy in, and ideas and all kinds of other, you know, pieces there to want that same end, right? That same prioritization, then people are much more likely to, you know, gel, right, they're much more likely to just come together and make that thing happen. And quite honestly, I always, I always try to explain to people like if we can get aligned, like, just literally like compass direction, move, all Cardinal north, then whatever the order, we're gonna get there faster. So if you just follow my lead, right, even if you don't particularly like exactly what it is and the way it is, I want it to get done. Just by virtue of aligning yourself in the same direction. We'll get to your thing that much faster. Right. And so it's not necessarily that we have to agree on every component, because Lord knows not everybody agrees with me on every everything. But if you can, at least a lot look in the same direction and know that that is the direction we all want to go in, then by virtue of us all going in the same direction, we're going to be able to find the efficiencies that actually help us combine together and create that effectiveness. So I think you know, it comes back to and this is just my suggestion is to just sit down with everybody and say, Okay, I understand that there's this misalignment but this is where I'm coming from, where are you coming from? Let's see if we can't make something better that moves us all in the same direction. And then from that point, you can say well, you know, what I want to do right now it's going to take this amount of time if we all really you know, urgently move toward getting to that thing faster, then I will immediately put the next thing first as soon as we get past that finish line. And I think that's a good way to to open up the dialog and see if there isn't some synergy that can be created

Unknown Speaker  41:05  
I would just flip what you just said right? And ask them where they're coming from first after reading this book. Now before reading this book I would have said where I'm coming from first but I if you probably want to do the flip there but

Raymond Sidney-Smith  41:20  
absolutely yeah so so certainly a habit five you know, technique that yes or seek to understand

Unknown Speaker  41:26  
Yeah, and and these all work so well together you know, and I think you have it too if if we understand where we're going yeah, if if we have that end in mind and maybe we all don't agree on the same end, but if you know what the end in mind I have is that you can probably understand a little bit better why I'm putting this thing as first you know, and I guess if Stephen Covey and David Allen wrote a book together the you know, the the the next action and the outcome Yeah, wouldn't that be great? Your next action outcome habit three, that the outcome that's that's the habit to that's the end and the next action that's the thing we're doing now that's the putting that first thing first so that you get to the end that you wanted to get to instead of being distracted somewhere else.

Unknown Speaker  42:22  
Yeah, that Frank you I want to put in my request because what came up for me was how do you integrate GTD with this book and with his his work and I would love a discussion just on that person? Because I think it's really interesting. I mean, they obviously overlap but I'm interested to how practically people actually do it.

Unknown Speaker  42:43  
Well you know, and one was always talked about is being the top down approach and the other the bottom up approach. And I guess no matter which way you start, when you arrive, you know, when you come to the middle when both of them arrive at the middle you know, I think the balance there You can't go with one or the other. Yeah,

Raymond Sidney-Smith  43:08  
you know, I absolutely came to obviously, first things basically First things first, but I came to seven habits before getting things done was published. And so I was very much steeped in the covey perspective of, you know, setting goals and you know, all of that and that was in kind of the height of, of Tony Robbins Anthony Robbins work of, you know, rpm and just like, you know, set a big, audacious, you know, goal and go after it. And that never really ever quite, resonated with me that whole concept, But first things first really helped me understand that there needed to be a method in in that I invested in and with the Franklin Covey planner, and the way in which I just organized naturally, it worked for me, it also worked in that particular world that I was in, like, professionally at the time. And, and then right at that point in which I felt, I want to say friction, I probably felt some friction with regard to my system was when 2001 turned around and the book came out. So I had this like natural like, going from being steeped in the covey perspective to then immediately experiencing the value of implementing getting things done. So I had done a mission statement, I had created all of the all of the goal oriented material. And it wasn't until the eighth habit and making it all work when those two methods actually ended up synergizing so to speak, to use that that term, but I feel like for those who are on who have come to GTD, and they've learned GTD really well, it can sound and seem like what Dr. Covey is saying is in conflict. But once you look at the way in which they're they're both seeing the world, they're just asking you to do the same work in a different order, right? It's like, it's like start one place, and you'll eventually get to this place. And if you start in this place, you're gonna end up getting to this place. Either way, you end up in the same spot. If you personalize your system, I think a lot of people, what they try to do is they try to say, I'm going to do this performer. And by doing it performer, they run up against the the edges of the system, not working for them, because they haven't made it their own. And I think very much, so you have to understand your own personality, your own history, right? Your own trauma, all of those things are necessary to say, okay, for me, in this life, I want to do these things. And so what do I need to do? What infrastructure I do? Do I need to put into place? What skills do I need to set up in order to support myself through those? And when you do, things just start to work better? And I think GTD is a little bit more prescriptive, right? It's a it's, it's like, set this in tray on your desk. It's, it's a little bit more illustrative in that sense. And, and then, of course, with the seven habits, and ultimately the eighth habit, it's a little bit more of the internal work of thinking how you're going to do things by virtue of working with people. And that's I mean, the number one thing that I think that GTD lacks is it doesn't talk about working with other people, you know, until you get to like that little tiny slim section about, you know, meetings and how people should talk about getting things done. And next action steps inside of meetings. Right. So I think I think that you worked well together in that sense. Matthews noting that Oh, so yeah, there was the introduction to seven habits in the GTD meetups. And after reading each chapter, the aha moments regarding that, so you're more than welcome. You're more than welcome. Linda, does that make any sense questions from there?

Unknown Speaker  47:11  
It does. And I kind of feel like David Allen kind of assumed his audience that already read the Seven Habits too. So he was like, not doing that part of it. He was doing different part of it. You know, that kind of I absolutely agree. I absolutely agree. I was writing to at that time, probably had read the seven habits. And yeah, you're talking about you do that work over

Raymond Sidney-Smith  47:31  
1996? You know, the the 25 most influential Americans, Dr. Covey was one of them, right? David Allen published getting things done in 2001. And so he absolutely knew in the development of the 90s that the biggest name in that space was cavae. And that people knew of his material. So why would he try to rewrite that for people? So he was like, Okay, let me write the basically the rocket ship manual dou x dou y do, you know, do Zed and that's what he why he wrote getting things done the way he did also, he's a organization consultant. And he wanted to be hired as a coach. So he wrote a book that was going to get him hired by those types of big names out there. And that's, that's really why he wrote the book The way he did. And so I very much see the two being different and valuable in such different ways. And I know I said this now several times, our next book is the eighth habit. And I still find the eighth habit to be the best covey book, you know, and it's just it's the it's the book that most speaks to me. And I absolutely recommend to everybody the audio book, read read the physical one, but definitely listen to the audio book, even if you just listen to the introduction of Dr. Covey. Just with you know, he's got that booming, you know, bass baritone voice. And just the way he introduces you to the concept of finding your voice and helping other others find their voice is just, it just gives me chills thinking about it, but I never saw them in necessarily conflict, I always found it to be like, okay, now that I understand this about myself, and I've done this internal work, now is time to think about the practical components. How do I actually manifest this in a in my external world? But I'm certainly not the only viewpoint on that. So if anybody else has other thoughts, by all means, share them. I want it to kind of lead us to our final point, which is, is what was your greatest takeaway from the book? And were there any parts in the book that you just like, disagreed with that you perhaps just, you know, you didn't get for some reason just didn't seem to work for you. But maybe greatest takeaway, maybe greatest disagreement, something like that. be useful, interesting to hear where people aligned or misaligned with regard to the material or other kinds of moments or parts from the book that were really, you know, enlightening for you.

Unknown Speaker  49:58  
To me, it's been staying Power. If you read so many articles about the the rise and fall of XYZ, you don't read about the rise and fall of the seven habits. I think they are, they are eternal, they speak to us now more than they ever have now, I couldn't

Raymond Sidney-Smith  50:18  
agree more, I think I think that it has staying power. There's some, you know, outdated pneus to the book in the sense of, you know, the context. But I think I think the principles the and, and certainly as was noted earlier, just having Sean covey kind of spruce up the book in that way and, and give that color to the pages again, was really, really helpful. I think in future reads, I'll probably still go back to for me, I think it was like the 20th anniversary edition or whatever the whatever that particular edition was that I was reading earlier, I have it on the bookshelf somewhere here, but um, you know, I that's the one that I've marked up the most. And so I'll probably feel most comfortable going back to that version. But I did enjoy the the additions there. And certainly the the, the foreword from Jim Collins,

Unknown Speaker  51:09  
I would say the big takeaway for me was just reading it at a time when it isn't really making sense. So that kind of life changing. And it happened as I was reading the book, like it wasn't like, Okay, I'm going to schedule this for three weeks from now I'm going to implement this. It was as I was reading, I'm like, okay, I can make different choices, this is what I'm going to do instead. But I have a lot of the book that I don't agree with. And I was, it was nice to be able to read it and say, Well, I don't agree with this. But that's okay, that doesn't negate the seven habits. That just means that Mr. Covey and I have a different worldview. And that's fine. And so that was nice, because I have a tendency to be one of those people who read something, and I come upon something, I don't agree with it. I'm like, Ah, so that book across the room, I wouldn't do that to this. But, um, but yeah, so there was a lot of things that, you know, he had a lot of work ethic, things and just stuff to me that is very, it feels very 20th century to me. So I really did enjoy Sean's additions, because a lot of it, I think, is kind of mired in the way I was raised. And I'm trying to move away from some of those paradigms of, you're a good person if you do certain things and that kind of thing, and more towards a better paradigm in my mind.

Raymond Sidney-Smith  52:30  
I enjoyed just in, in closing out the conversation, I really enjoyed the components of the book, especially this edition. Because again, like you Linda, it resonated at the right moment, you know, right, right material right time, but also because covey has this way of just identifying a set of steps that help you logically think through the principles that he's trying to teach. And so I'm always like, Okay, how do I think through this particular concept? And then he's like, Oh, well, if you want to be able to, you know, do empathetic listening, or empathic listening, then you need to do these things, right? Like, here it goes, your four steps, you know, and it's just like, Oh, that's right. Okay, well, if I evaluate, then I probe then I advise, then I interpret that I'm going to be doing this thing correctly. And, and he does this in the eighth habit, I think just masterfully I, you know, I know we're not having that discussion yet. But he does it so masterfully in the habit, and but he does it here in the Seven Habits really well also, which is that he just he lays it out for you that this is the kind of book that you just can't read once and feel like, Okay, I got all of it, you do have to go back over the book, and really dwell on some of these things, because they just like getting things done. These are skills you are developing over time to be able to get better and better at them. And the better you get at those skills, the better your life is going to be. Overall, you're going to be able to make the changes necessary in that in that way. So

Unknown Speaker  53:58  
just to add real quickly, Sean's addition and at the back of the book, the new insights, insights on inside out where they give you what they do in the workshop on the actual things to do for each habit. I think this book is worth buying, just to get back to this new addition. Because it's nice to have it laid out like Oh, these are the steps that we teach people in the workshop.

Raymond Sidney-Smith  54:20  
Absolutely, absolutely. I really enjoyed the afterward and him answering questions including his question about whether he's really bald. The way in which he responded to it, I actually listened to the audiobook as well. I'd read it and then listen to the audiobook for this discussion. And his intonation in his voice when he when he read the answer to whether he's bald or not, is just priceless. Because you could really hear his his sarcasm in his voice. He clearly had a good personality. And with that, we've reached the end of this book discussion about the Seven Habits of Highly Effective People 30th anniversary edition by Stephen R. Covey, with Sean Covey's edition To that 30th anniversary edition, a few comments and announcements before we end this episode for you. So here we go. First and foremost, we host quarterly live discussions of personal productivity books, just like the one we discussed today. And of course, you're invited, simply head over to Productivity Book group.org. Again, that's Productivity Book group.org. And visit the upcoming books page for details. It has all the dates for the year, and an handy Google calendar that you can subscribe to, that will put all the events on your candle calendar automatically and update them as we make changes. If we do, we usually don't. But you know, if any changes happen, they'll automatically update they're there on Productivity Book group.org. You'll also find all of our past book discussions, our summary episodes and author interviews under episodes. In case you can't find a Productivity Book Group episode in your podcast app or podcast directory. So it'll usually only hold maybe the last 100 episodes are so so or sometimes less than that. So if for some reason it's not in that podcast app, go over to Productivity Book group.org. Click on episodes, and you'll see all of them their directions on how to subscribe and or now on Apple podcast world, it's follow but just directions and how to subscribe for free to Productivity Book Group in your favorite podcast app is on the website. So just click on subscribe, and it'll provide you instructions there. We really appreciate you taking a few minutes to rate and review us on Apple podcasts and Stitcher and otherwise, that really helps us expand our readership and bring new readers and callers into the fold into the Productivity Book Group world. And so thank you for spreading the word to help our Productivity Book Group lovers find us. Finally, we have a new digital community. It's not particularly new now. But we have a digital community where we discuss the books we're reading, you can access it from the web, as well as from Android and iOS applications. And so if you go head to Productivity Book group.org forward slash community, it will take you over to the digital community for you to join. It's free, it's easy to sign up. And then you can discuss books that you're reading, as well as the books we're reading together, all in that same space. And so we look forward to seeing you there. And with that, thank you to everyone for listening to us here on Productivity Book Group. I'm Ray Sidney-Smith. Here's to your productive life.

